### Pc Backstory
Born in the slums of the trader settlement Marrowmark located in Shurima, Marduun and his family never had it easy. They scraped by with odd jobs from the residents and merchants that came through Marrowmark. His older brother Akuba and him had to work as soon as they could walk or else they were outcast. There was no room for leniency. Every day was worse than the day before, but this was all that Marduun knew. Despite this environment Marduun was relatively happy mostly in thanks to his brother Akuba who always looked out for him and with whom he formed a strong bond.

But with the increase of Xer’Sai in southern Shurima (vicious voidborn who kill on sight) you could see Marrowmark, the once great trading settlement slowly beginning to dwindle. As less and less merchants came through, so lessened the odd jobs for Marduun and his family to do. The days got even worse than before as more and more people in the slums died of starvation. Then one day when Marduun came home Akuba was gone, Marduun’s parents could only give him a vague explanation, something about Akuba being gone for a while longer for some “big job”.

The following weeks they had a surprising amount of food, but that too passed and soon they were struggling like before. And then it happened four big armored mercenaries walked into their home and dropped off a big sack of Shuriman securis, but they took Marduun in return. Now it all made sense, they sold Akuba as a sand walker and now that they had run out of secruis it was Marduun’s turn. Marduun tried to escape the mercenaries but he stood no chance and soon found himself in shackles, now property of the caravan. 

Tired and worn out from the endless march through the desert sand, Marduun was hallucinating about what now seemed like the good days. When he was suddenly shocked back into reality by the deafening ringing of bells. He realized that his time had come as he saw the other sand walkers run out into the desert. His shackles were removed and for a moment he hesitated which was met with the cracking of a whip so into the desert he ran as the caravan road off. In the distance he saw a boulder cluster and with the last bit of energy left he ran for his life. When he just reached the cluster and as the ground quaked beneath him he tripped, hitting his head against a boulder.

When he woke up he saw the Xer’Sai laying there beside him and he scrambled away from it till his back was against the rocks. But it was not moving, somehow it had died and somehow he survived. He climbed on one of the boulders looking for any sign of life but nothing was out there. He was free again, but all alone.

Some years passed and Marduun managed to make quite the life for himself. He learned a lot while venturing out in the desserts. Like to follow the gigantic Dormun in search of drinking water or the paths of the Sandswimmers and how to ride them. He spent most of his time moving from town to town escorting people and caravans as he went. Scavenging the occasional ruins of a once great Shurima and so earning himself quite a healthy income. And now nearing the end of his greatest job so far. Moving some mysterious Shuriman artifacts to the coastal city Quathala in Noxus. 

As his ship docked in Quathala he was informed by his colleagues that they were going to an abandoned pub where Marduun was to stand guard at the door. And so he stood there for hours. When it finally started to get dark he decided to go inside but there was no one there. He feared the worst and ran to the docks. His fears were correct as he saw his “colleagues” ship sail off in the horizon with his rewards and possessions. And now here he stands backstabbed and left behind in some random city in Noxus.