‘He never spoke of you except to brand you as an enemy.’ Arutha considered, then went on, ‘Dulanic said you and Father were friends once.’

Guy again looked at the fire. His manner was distant, as if remembering. Softly he said, ‘Yes, very good friends.’ Again he fell into silence, then just as Arutha was about to speak, he said, ‘It started when we were both young men at court, during the reign of Rodric the Third. We were among the very first squires sent to the royal court – Caldric’s innovation was to produce rulers who know more than their fathers.’ Guy considered. ‘Let me tell you how it was. And when I’m done, maybe you’ll understand why you and your brother were never sent to court.

‘I was three years younger than your father, who was barely eighteen, but we were of a size and temper. At first we were thrown together, for he was a distant cousin, and I was expected to teach manners to this son of a rustic duke. In time we became friends. Over the years we gambled, wenched, and fought together.

‘Oh, we had differences, even then. Borric was a frontier noble’s son, more concerned with old concepts of honour and duty than in understanding the true causes of events around him. I, well…’ He drew his hand down over his face, as if stirring himself awake. His tone became more brisk. ‘I was raised in the eastern courts, and I was marked to command from an early age. My family is as old and honoured as any in the Kingdom, even yours. Had Delong and his brothers been slightly less gifted generals and my forebears slightly better ones, the Bas-Tyras would have been kings instead of the conDoins. So I had been taught from boyhood how the game of politics is played in the realms. No, we were very different in some ways, your father and I, but in my life there has never been a man I’ve loved more than Borric.’ He looked hard at Arutha. ‘He was the brother I never had.’

Arutha was intrigued. He had no doubt Guy was colouring things to suit his purpose, suspecting even the drunkenness was a pose, but he was curious to hear of his father’s youth. ‘What, then, caused the estrangement between you?’

‘We competed, as young men do, in the hunt, gambling, and for the affection of the ladies. Our political differences led to hot words from time to time, but we always found a way to gloss over arguments and reconcile ourselves. Once we even came to blows over some thoughtless remarks I made. I had said your great-grandfather had been nothing more than the disgruntled third son of a king, seeking to gain by strength of arms that which could not be found within the existing Kingdom. Borric saw him a great man who planted the banner of the Kingdom in Bosania.

‘I held that the West was a sap upon the resources of the Kingdom. The distances are too great for proper administration. You rule in Krondor. You know you govern an independent realm, with only broad policy coming from Rillanon. The Western Realm is almost a separate nation. Anyway, we argued about that, then fought. Afterward we relented in our anger. But that was the first sign of how deep were the differences we felt over the policies of the realms. Still, even those differences did nothing to lessen the bond between us.’

‘You make it sound a reasonable disagreement between honourable men over politics. But I knew Father. He hated you and his hate ran deep; there must be more.’

Guy again studied the firelight for a time. Softly he said, ‘Your father and I were rivals in many things, but most bitterly for your mother.’

Arutha sat forward. ‘What?’

‘When your uncle Malcom died of the fever, your father was called home. As older brother, Borric would inherit, which is why he had been sent to court for an education, but with Malcom dead your grandfather was alone. So your grandfather had the King name your father Warden of the West and send him back to Crydee. Your grandfather was aging – your grandmother had already died, and with Malcom’s death he seemed to fade quickly. It was less than two years later that he died and Borric became Duke of Crydee. By then Brucal had returned to Yabon, and I was Senior Squire of the King’s court. I looked forward to Borric’s return – for he was to present himself to the King to swear fealty as all new dukes are required to do during the first year of their office.’

Arutha calculated and realized that had to be the time his father had visited Brucal at Yabon, on his way to the capital. It was during that visit that Borric’s fancy was caught by a pretty serving maid, and from that union came Martin, a fact not known to Borric until five years later.

Guy continued speaking. ‘The year before Borric’s return to Rillanon, your mother came to court, to be a lady-in-waiting to Queen Janica, the King’s second wife – Prince Rodric’s mother. That’s when Catherine and I met. Until Gwynnath, she was the only woman I’ve ever loved.’

Guy lapsed into silence, and suddenly Arutha felt an odd sense of shame, as if he had somehow forced Guy to reexamine two painful losses. ‘Catherine was rare, Arutha. I know you understand that; she was your mother, but when I first saw her she was as fresh as a spring morning, with a blush in her cheeks and a hint of playfulness in her shy smile. Her hair was golden, with a shine to it. I fell in love with her the first moment I saw her. And so did your father. From that moment on, our competition for her attention became fierce.

‘For two months we both courted her, and by the end of the second, your father and I were not speaking, so bitter was our rivalry for Catherine. Your father kept putting off his return to Crydee, choosing to stay and woo Catherine. We vied desperately for her favour.

‘I was to have gone riding with Catherine one morning, but when I reached her quarters, she was readying to travel. She was first cousin to Queen Janica and, as such, a prize in the game of court intrigue. The lessons I had taught your father the years before had paid handsomely, for while I had been riding and walking in the garden with Catherine, he had been speaking to the King. Rodric directed your mother to wed your father, as was his right as her guardian. It was a politically expedient marriage, for even then the King had doubts as to his son’s ability and his brother’s health. Damn it, but Rodric was an unhappy man. His three sons from his first marriage had died before reaching manhood, and he never got over their deaths or the death of his beloved Queen Beatrice. And his younger brother, Erland, was a late child and sickly with the lung flux. He was but ten years older than Prince Rodric. The court knew that the King wished to name your father Heir, but Janica had given him a son, a shy boy whom Rodric despised. I think he forced your mother to marry your father to strengthen the tie to the throne, so he might name him Heir, and heaven knows he spent the next twelve years trying to either make the Prince a better man or break him in the trying. But the King never did name an Heir before he died, and we were left with Rodric the Fourth, a sadder, more broken man than his father.’

Arutha looked on, his cheeks flushed. ‘What do you mean, the King forced my mother to marry my father?’

Guy’s one good eye blazed. ‘It was a political marriage, Arutha.’

Arutha’s anger rose up. ‘But my mother loved my father!’

‘By the time you were born, I’m sure she had learned to love him. Your father was a good enough man and she a loving woman. But in those days, she loved me.’ His voice became thick with old emotions. ‘She loved me. I had known her a year before Borric’s return. We had already vowed to wed when my tenure as a squire was through, but it was a secret thing, a pledge between children made in a garden one night. I had written to my father, asking him to intercede with the Queen, to gain me Catherine’s hand. I never thought to speak to the King. I, the clever son of an eastern lord, had been bested by the country noble’s boy in a court intrigue. Damn, I had thought I was so wily. But I was then only nineteen. It was so long ago.

‘I fell into a rage. In those days my temper was a match for your father’s. I dashed from your mother’s room and sought Borric out. We fought; in the King’s palace, we duelled and almost killed each other. You must have seen the long wound upon your father’s side, from under the left arm across his ribs. I gave him that scar. I bear a similar wound from him. I almost died. When I recovered, your father was a week gone to Crydee, taking Catherine with him. I would have followed, but the King forbade it on pain of death. He was correct, for they were married. I took to wearing black as a public mark of my shame. Then I was sent to fight Kesh at Deep Taunton.’ He laughed a bitter laugh. ‘Much of my reputation as a general came from that encounter. I owe my success in part to your father. I punished the Keshians for his having robbed me of Catherine. I did things no general in his right mind should do, leading attack after attack. I think now I hoped to die then.’ His voice softened, and he chuckled. ‘I was almost disappointed when they asked for quarter and terms of surrender.’

Guy sighed. ‘So much of what happened in my life stems from that. I ceased holding ill will toward Borric, eventually, but he … turned a bitter side up when she died. He rejected the idea of sending his sons to the King’s court. I think he worried I might take revenge upon you and Lyam.’

‘He loved Mother; he was never a happy man after her death,’ Arutha said, feeling somehow both uncomfortable and angry. He did not need to justify his father’s behaviour to his most bitter enemy.

Guy nodded. ‘I know, but when we are young we cannot entertain the idea another’s feelings can be as deep as our own. Our love is so much loftier, our pain so much more intense. But as I grew older, I realized Borric loved Catherine as much as I did. And I think she did love him.’ Guy’s good eye fixed on a point in space. His tone became softer, reflective. ‘She was a wonderful, generous woman with room in her life for many loves. Yet, I think deep in his heart your father harboured doubts.’ Guy regarded Arutha with an expression of mixed wonder and pity. ‘Can you imagine that? How sad it must have been? Perhaps, in a strange way, I was the luckier, for I _knew_ she loved me. I had _no_ doubt.’ Arutha noticed a faint sheen of moisture in Guy’s good eye. The Protector brushed away the gathering tear in an unselfconscious gesture. He settled back, closing his eye, his hand to his forehead, and quietly added, ‘There seems little justice in life at times.’

Arutha pondered. ‘Why are you telling me this?’

Guy sat up, shedding his mood. ‘Because I need you. And there can be no doubts on your part. To you I am a traitor who sought to take control of the Kingdom for his own aggrandizement. In part, you are correct.’ Arutha was again surprised at Guy’s candour.

‘But how can you justify what you did to Erland?’

‘I am responsible for his death. I cannot disavow that. It was my captain who ordered his continued confinement after I had ordered his release. Radburn had his uses, but tended to be overzealous. I can understand his panic, for I would have punished him for letting Anita and you escape. I needed her to gain a foothold in the succession, and you would have been a useful bargaining piece with your father.’ Seeing surprise on Arutha’s face, he said, ‘Oh yes, my agents knew you were in Krondor – or they reported to me when I returned – but Radburn made the error of thinking you’d lead him to Anita. It never occurred to him you might have nothing to do with her escape. The fool should have clapped you in jail and kept the search on for her.’

Arutha felt a return of his distrust and a lessening of sympathy. Despite Guy’s forthright speech, his callous references to using people rankled. Guy continued, ‘But I never wished Erland dead. I already had the Vice-royalty from Rodric, giving me full command over the West. I didn’t need Erland, only a link to the throne: Anita. Rodric the Fourth was mad. I was one of the first to know – as was Caldric – for in kings people overlook and forgive behaviour they would not tolerate in others. Rodric could not be allowed to rule much longer. The first eight years of the war were difficult enough in the court, but in the last year of his reign, Rodric was almost totally without reason. Kesh always has an eye turned northward, seeking signs of weakness. I did not wish the burdens of kingship, but even with your father as heir after Erland, I simply felt I was better able to rule than anyone in a position to inherit.’

‘But why all this intrigue? You had backing in the congress. Caldric, Father, and Erland barely overruled your attempt to become Prince Rodric’s regent before he reached majority. You could have found another way.’

‘The congress can ratify a King,’ answered Guy, pointing a finger at Arutha. ‘It cannot remove him. I needed a way to take the throne without civil war. The war with the Tsurani dragged on, and Rodric would not give your father the Armies of the East. He wouldn’t even give them to me, and I was the only man he trusted. Nine years of a losing war and a mad King, and the nation was bleeding to death. No, it had to end, but no matter how much backing I had, there were those like Brucal and your father who would have marched against me.

‘That’s why I wanted Anita for my wife and you as a bargaining piece. I was ready to offer Borric a choice.’

‘What choice?’

‘My preference was to let Borric rule in the West, to divide the Kingdom and let each realm follow its own destiny; but I knew none of the western lords would have permitted that. So my offer to Borric was to allow him to name the Heir after me, even if it were Lyam or you. I would have named whoever he chose Prince of Krondor, and I would have ensured I had no sons to contest for the crown. But your father would have had to accept me as King of Rillanon and swear fealty.’

Suddenly Arutha understood this man. He had put aside all questions of personal honour after he had lost Arutha’s mother to Borric, but he had kept one honour above all others: his honour for the Kingdom. He had been willing to do anything, even commit regicide – to go down in history as a usurper and traitor – in exchange for removing a mad king. It left a bad taste in Arutha’s mouth.

‘With Rodric’s death and Lyam being named Heir, all that became meaningless. Your brother is not known to me, but I expect he shares some of your father’s nature. In any event, the Kingdom must be in better hands than when Rodric sat the throne.’

Arutha sighed. ‘You have given me much to think about, Guy. I don’t approve of your reasoning or your methods, but I understand some of it.’

‘Your approval is immaterial. I repent nothing of what I have done, and will admit my decision to claim the throne myself, ignoring your father’s place in succession, was done in part from spite. If I couldn’t have your mother, Borric couldn’t have the crown. Beyond selfish considerations, I also held the firm conviction I would have made a better king than your father. What I do best is rule. But it doesn’t mean I feel good about what I’ve had to do.

‘No, what I want is your understanding. You don’t have to like me, but you must accept me for who and what I am. I need your acceptance to secure the future of Armengar.’